Nothing beats seeing that smile on your loved ones face, especially if it shows a healthy mouth, teeth, and gums. This is why dental and oral care are very important at any age to prevent gum disease and cavities. Poor oral health can lead to a variety of systemic health issues. Gum infections are known to promote bacteria that help create fatty plaques associated with heart attacks and strokes. In elders, especially, breathing in those bacteria can lead to pneumonia. When your loved one's health is compromised, your job as a caregiver becomes much more difficult.

So it's a good idea to head off oral and dental problems before they begin. A good way to do that is through daily cleaning and routine checkups. Have your loved one brush his or her teeth twice a day with a soft-bristled toothbrush. If help is needed with brushing or if your loved one has memory loss, you can gently assist in the process by first placing the brush in his or her hand and guiding the brush gently towards the mouth. He or she may remember how to finish the task once you've started it.

An electric toothbrush may make things easier and may even be better at cutting down on periodontal disease. Monitor your loved ones brushing for 2 to 5 minutes to make sure that plaque is removed. You might want to give your loved one mouthwash after brushing but make sure it doesn't contain alcohol, which leaves the mouth dry. Instead, use alcohol-free, pH-balanced, and hydrating mouth washes. They're recommended for elders and for those with dry mouth caused by medication.

Don't forget to have your loved one floss at least once a day and preferably just before bedtime. In 2010, the American Dental Association published a study showing that for patients over 60, those with the highest amount of gum disease-related bacteria scored lowest on tests. Flossing keeps gum disease at bay, so just as you did with the toothbrush, offer your loved one the floss and see if he or she can use it without help. If not, you can do the task yourself. If you have trouble using string floss, a floss pick might be an easier alternative.

Still another alternative is an oral irrigator, which shoots or pulses jets of water to remove debris from between the teeth. There are manual as well as electric irrigators available. If your loved one doesn't brush or floss after each meal or snack, it's important to get him or her to at least rinse. Offer a cup or bottle of water for rinsing out over a sink or emesis basin. If more help is needed, you might spray the inside of the mouth with a spray bottle, then gently clean out any remaining food with a slightly dampened tooth or oral swab. An oral irrigator can be used for this purpose as well.

If your loved one has memory loss or resists good oral care, it's important that you approach him or her gently and respectfully, with patience and consideration. Find an even tone in your voice and in the right setting keep things routine and calm. Your attention to detail will help this process go smoothly. Sometimes, listening to music or holding a beloved object will create a pleasant distraction for your loved one during those daily cleaning times.

When it's time to go to the dentist, choose a professional who knows your loved ones special needs, like a geriatric dentist or one who helps out with dementia or Alzheimer's. There are dentists now who practice what's called sedation or sleep dentistry, which allows the patient full treatment while they're deeply relaxed or fully asleep through the use of pills, nitrous oxide, or general anesthesia. And with the growing number of elderly who are homebound, there are dentists that will even come to you with mobile dental services. Your loved one can get compassionate dental care, anything from x-rays to denture fittings, right at home.

The rule of thumb is to see the dentist every six months, and more frequently if your loved one has conditions like diabetes or if he or she is not cleaning teeth on a daily basis. Rather than pulling teeth, dentists today will try to preserve them. If teeth do need to be pulled, however, your loved one's nutritional choices and overall health could be affected.

Whether your loved one has real teeth or wears dentures, if he or she can't eat in the usual way or has pain when chewing, most likely he or she is not getting all the nutrients needed for optimum health. Dentures have to fit just right or high-fiber foods like vegetables or fruit will be put aside because your loved one can't chew them comfortably. Just like real teeth, dentures can also accumulate plaque so they should be brushed daily and should not be worn to bed. Gum tissue benefits from natural cleansing by saliva and an overnight rest from dentures.

If your loved one wears dentures, he or she needs to see a dentist at least once a year to check for a correct fit and very importantly here, to get a screening for oral cancer. Older patients are in the highest risk group for oral cancer, more die of it than cervical and skin cancers combined. A screening and early detection could easily reduce the mortality rate if only people knew about it. Remind your dentist if he doesn't recommend a screening for your loved one.

Yes, medications can also affect your loved one's oral health. In older people, medications often cause xerostomia or dry mouth, which leaves the mouth susceptible to decay and disease and can affect speech and cause throat problems. Your loved one's dentist may suggest brushing with a baking soda toothpaste, keeping the mouth moist with a saliva substitute, or using xylitol products which stimulate saliva production.

So if you like to see that nice smile on your loved one's face, help it along by paying attention to his or her oral health on a regular basis. Your loved one's comfort and well-being will be enhanced, and your caregiving journey will be a happier one.