"Let's talk about ADL's. ADL stands for Activities of Daily Living, and it refers to all the activities that you, I, and your care receiver need to practice. This includes bathing and dressing. Helping out your loved one with ADL's can sometimes be a sensitive issue because sometimes it can make him or her feel exposed, embarrassed, or vulnerable. If your loved one has dementia, it can also include fear of the activity itself.

Therefore, approach your loved one with respect, patience, and in a gentle way. Some things to remember are: go easy and don't rush anything, create a safe environment, allow your loved one as much independence as possible as you stand by. Gently talk through all of the steps you're taking. If your loved one has dementia, he or she may need more prompting and help throughout, so show and tell, and sometimes guide his or her hand in the task.

You can help your loved one to bathe in one of three ways: using a shower, a tub, or a sponge bath. No matter which of these you use, your bathroom should be equipped with grab bars, a detachable shower house, and a bath chair or bench. These will help prevent falls and make bath time a lot easier for you. Start the bathing process by gathering together all the personal care supplies you'll be needing. Make sure you have a safe, warm, and dry bathroom. Remove any objects in the way of your loved one's path. Place a bath mat outside of the tub or shower, and a rubber mat on the tub bottom or shower floor.

When showering your loved one, choose warm water and mild water pressure. If he or she is shy, drape a large towel around his or her body. Guide him or her gently to the seat or to the grab bar if standing is preferred. Let him or her feel the water temperature and handle the showerhead if necessary. When washing the hair, it's best if your loved one is seated. The detachable shower house and a well-placed washcloth can help keep soap away from the eyes. Make sure the bath is thorough by cleaning under all folds of skin.

After the shower, gently help your loved one onto the floor mat and wait until he or she is out before turning off the water. You don't want your loved one to get chilled or scalded. Lead him or her to a nearby chair or even the toilet seat, and you can begin the drying process.

You won't need to give a daily shower or bath to your loved one if you routinely give him or her a sponge bath. This is a quicker alternative and a good one if your loved one is afraid of stepping into the tub or the shower. Have your loved ones sit on a towel-covered bathroom chair or toilet seat, or stand at the bathroom sink. Fill the sink with warm water and add a bit of soap to it. Not too soapy, however. Now, using a few washcloths, start washing your loved one from the top and work your way down the body. Again, let your loved one do as much as possible by showing, telling, or guiding.

Now refill the sink with fresh warm water and with clean washcloths remove the soap by wiping down the body all the way once more. And if you're really looking for alternatives, you can bypass traditional bathing altogether by choosing from a variety of waterless body washes and dry shampoos now on the market. A gentle lotion is really good for dry skin. You can apply it over your loved one's body, including feet and hands. Massage it in, then towel off the excess. And don't forget to apply common cornstarch under folds of skin to keep areas dry and rash-free.

If your loved one has routinely visited a barber shop or a beauty parlor in the past for nail or hair care, he or she may prefer these services over the same care at home. However, if you take care of your loved one's hair and nails at home, the best time to do this is right after bathing. Make sure your loved one's hands and feet are dry and take time to inspect them for any irregularities. Use a nail file regularly to keep finger and toenails at manageable lengths, but if you must cut, cut them straight across with a clipper, then file the edges down. Cuticles can be simply pushed back with a towel.

Shaving, in general, is best done with an electric shaver. Your loved one can use it safely, plus it can provide him or her a measure of independence. If you must use a safety razor, however, you are the one that should be doing it, not your loved one.

After bathing and grooming, it's time to get your loved one dressed. Keep your loved one's wardrobes simple with easy-to-manage pull-on clothing and fasteners, using Velcro, elastic bands, or large buttons. Lots of zippers and small buttons will be frustrating or confusing. If your loved one can still dress independently, you might lay clothes out so that he or she won't have to make choices that can so often lead to frustration.

Lastly, your loved one's shoes should be low-cut with soles that are lightweight and don't tend to slip. Remember that when you're helping your loved one with bathing, dressing, grooming, leave plenty of time, take plenty of time, and if your loved one doesn't want to cooperate, just stop. Take 10 minutes, even a whole day, and try again. Because in any caregiving activity, your watch words should be patience and acceptance.